Welcome to the world of Statecharts
What is a statechart?
A statechart can be explained in many ways, and we’ll get to those explanations, but essentially, a statechart is a drawing. Here’s a simple statechart:

However, this drawing isn’t very useful for software engineers who want to reap the benefits outlined elsewhere on this site, so let’s dive into some other ways of describing what a statechart is. The original paper that defines statecharts bills them as “A visual formalism for complex systems” (Harel, 1987). With that out of the way, let’s try to explain statecharts.
Introduction to statecharts
Put simply, a statechart is a beefed up state machine. The beefing up solves a lot of the problems that state machines have, especially state explosion that happens as state machines grow. One of the goals of this site is to help explain what statecharts are and how they are useful.
    • What is a state machine?
    • What is a statechart?
Why should you use statecharts?
Statecharts offer a surprising array of benefits
    • It’s easier to understand a statechart than many other forms of code.
    • The behaviour is decoupled from the component in question.
        ◦ This makes it easier to make changes to the behaviour.
        ◦ It also makes it easier to reason about the code.
        ◦ And the behaviour can be tested independently of the component.
    • The process of building a statechart causes all the states to be explored.
    • Studies have shown that statechart based code has lower bug counts than traditional code.
    • Statecharts lends itself to dealing with exceptional situations that might otherwise be overlooked.
    • As complexity grows, statecharts scale well.
    • A statechart is a great communicator: Non-developers can understand the statecharts, while QA can use a statecharts as an exploratory tool.
It’s worth noting that you’re already coding state machines, except that they’re hidden in the code.
Why should you not use statecharts?
There are a few downsides to using statecharts that you should be aware of.
    • Programmers typically need to learn something new, although the underpinnings (state machines) would be something that most programmers are familiar with.
    • It’s usually a very foreign way of coding, so teams might experience pushback based on how very different it is.
    • There is an overhead to extracting the behaviour in that the number of lines of code might increase with smaller statecharts.
What are the main arguments against statecharts?
There are a few common arguments against statecharts in addition to the ones listed above:
    • It’s simply not needed.
    • It goes against the grain of [insert name of technology].
    • It increases the number of libraries, for web applications this means increased load time.
The benefits outlined above should make it clear that the introduction of statecharts is generally a net positive.
How do you use statecharts?
First of all, know that a W3C committee spent 10+ years (2005 to 2015) standardizing something called SCXML (yes, Statechart XML), and that it defines a lot of the semantics and specifies how to deal with certain edge cases. There are tools to read, author and even execute statecharts written in SCXML, in various languages. There are also some derivatives that support the same model as SCXML, but using a different syntax.
Additionally, there are statechart libaries for a variety of platforms, that in varying degrees support the semantics described by SCXML. You should consider using these libraries just to get those edge cases taken care of. The libraries generally perform entry and exit actions in the right order and so on.
With that out of the way, read on!
Executable statecharts
In addition to just using statecharts to model the behaviour in documents separate from the actual running code, it’s possible to use one of various machine formats, both to design the behaviour, and at run-time to actually be the behaviour. The idea is to have a single source of truth that describes the behaviour of a component, and that this single source drives both the actual run-time code, but that it can also be used to generate a precise diagram that visualises the statechart.
This carries along some different pros and cons:
Why should you use executable statecharts?
    • No need to translate diagrams into code
    • No bugs introduced by hand translation of diagrams
    • The diagrams are always in sync
    • The diagrams are more precise
Why should you not use executable statecharts?
    • The diagrams may become quite complex
    • The format and tools for executable statecharts is limited
    • Type safety between statechart and the component is hard to enforce
How do you use executable statecharts?
In essence, if you have any definition of a statechart in your code, all you need to do is to take that representation and automate the generation of the visual statechart. This is of course simpler when the definition is in a separate file, e.g. in a JSON or XML file.
This is all explained on the page on how to use statecharts!
Anything else?
If you feel like chatting to someone about statecharts, you should go to spectrum.chat/statecharts, where you’ll find a community of like minded developers that can help you understand and reap the benefits of using Statecharts.
Quite a few people have written books or held presentations that deal with statecharts in various ways, and they’re included in our resources page.
There are some pages that haven’t found any place in the web of documents, so they’re honourably mentioned here:
    • Use case: Statecharts in User Interfaces
    • Concepts — The most important concepts in a statechart and what they look like in a diagram.
    • Glossary — A list of terms that get thrown around when talking about statecharts, with their definitions.
    • FizzBuzz — FizzBuzz is a well known problem, and it’s been used as a backdrop to explain various statechart concepts.
Acknowledgements
This page is a part of the statecharts.github.io project. Check out the chat rooms over on spectrum.chat where you can find more people discussing statecharts.
Published using GitHub Pages from github.com/statecharts (edit this page)
Glossary: Action Atomic state Compound state Condition state Activity Automatic transition Delayed event Delayed transition Enter Event Exit Final state Generated event Guard History state Initial state Internal event Local transition Parallel State Pseudostate Raised event Refine Self transition State Transition 

What is a state machine?
Wikipedia defines a finite-state machine (FSM) as:
an abstract machine that can be in exactly one of a finite number of states at any given time. The FSM can change from one state to another in response to some external inputs; the change from one state to another is called a transition. An FSM is defined by a list of its states, its initial state, and the conditions for each transition.
And further:
A state is a description of the status of a system that is waiting to execute a transition.
A state machine is also a visual depiction of such an abstract machine.
Understanding state machines is almost the same as understanding statecharts. In many ways, statecharts are the “bigger brother” of state machines, designed to overcome some of the limitations of state machines.
Example
Here is a visual depiction of a simple state machine. It is a model of a simple on/off switch.
A simple on/off switch with two states. 
Some observations over this machine.
    • It consists of two states, “on” and “off”. This machine can therfore be in exactly one of the two states at any point in time. In other words, the transitions between states are instantaneous.
    • The “flick” event causes it to transition between states.
    • When the machine enters the “on” state, a side effect occurs. A light is turned on.
    • When the machine exits the “on” state, another side effect occurs. A light is turned off.
Relationship with statecharts
State machines are closely related to their bigger brother, statecharts. A statechart is essentially a state machine that allows any state to include more machines, in a hierarchical fashion. This is to overcome some of the limitations that are inherent to state machines.
The primary goal of statecharts.github.io is to help you to understand statecharts. An understanding of state machines is a nice side effect. What is a statechart?
Abstract machine vs run-time
An important distinction must be made between the abstract machine itself (e.g. the drawing of a state machine, or the code) and the more concrete run-time execution of a particular abtract machine. This distinction is similar to the difference between a class (abstract definition) and an object (concrete instantiation). Similarly, for a single abstract machine, there may be many executions, just as there are often many instances of any particular class.
The terms “statechart”, “state machine” and “FSM” are often used to mean both the abstract and run-time form, although the run-time form sometimes has the qualifier “run” or “execution”, as in “state machine execution” or “statetchart run”.
An abstract state machine is a software component that defines a finite set of states:
    • One state is defined as the initial state. When a machine starts to execute, it automatically enters this state.
    • Each state can define actions that occur when a machine enters or exits that state. Actions will typically have side effects.
    • Each state can define events that trigger a transition.
    • A transition defines how a machine would react to the event, by exiting one state and entering another state.
    • A transition can define actions that occur when the transition happens. Actions will typically have side effects.
When “running” a state machine, this abstract state machine is executed. The first thing that happens it that the state machine enters the “initial state”. Then, events are passed to the machine as soon as they happen. When an event happens:
    • The event is checked against the current state’s transitions.
    • If a transition matches the event, that transition “happens”.
    • By virtue of a transition “happening”, states are exited, and entered and the relevant actions are performed
    • The machine immediately is in the new state, ready to process the next event.
Further reading
    • What is a statechart? — Build on the knowledge of state machines to
    • An example state machine — Explain some statechart concepts by building on the simple “on off” state machine.
This page is a part of the statecharts.github.io project. Check out the chat rooms over on spectrum.chat where you can find more people discussing statecharts.
Published using GitHub Pages from github.com/statecharts (edit this page)
Glossary: Action Atomic state Compound state Condition state Activity Automatic transition Delayed event Delayed transition Enter Event Exit Final state Generated event Guard History state Initial state Internal event Local transition Parallel State Pseudostate Raised event Refine Self transition State Transition 

State Machine: State Explosion
The main problem that’s stopping widespread usage of state machines is the fact that beyond very simple examples, state machines often end up with a large number of states, a lot of them with identical transitions. Statecharts solve this state explosion problem.
A classic example is that of a user interface element that might be modeled as being valid or invalid and have a state machine that describes this behaviour. Here is an example of such a simple state machine.

The machine starts in the Valid state, and upon receiving the events i or v, transitions to the invalid or valid states, respectively.
Now let’s say we wanted to allow the component to be enabled. The e event enables it, and the d event disables it. The state machine would need to know that a component is enabled or disabled . With traditional state machines you end up with four states: valid/enabled, invalid/enabled, valid/disabled, and invalid/disabled.

To begin with, this doesn’t look too bad, because we’ve omitted the transitions. We need two sets of transitions for the existing i and v events, and we need similar transitions for the e and d events for enable and disable. In total we can see that in order to support four states, we need eight transitions:

Four states isn’t such a big problem, see what happens when we add another feature that we want to model. Let’s say we add a dirty bit to indicate that the user has made a change to the field, then we end up with state names like valid/enabled/unchanged and a total of 8 states:

Some states might also not make sense to model; perhaps an unchanged field should not be considered invalid. This simplifies the diagram somewhat, but not enough. The sheer volume of states is already overwhelming.
However, the problem is exacerbated by the transitions to go with each new set of states:

What we are witnessing is referred to as the “state explosion” of state machines, because adding a new aspect to the state machine multiplies the number of states that need to be modeled, and creates a disproportionately high number of transitions.
The number of states needed to represent all possible combinations of variables is the cartesian product of the sets of variables.
Statecharts to the rescue
Statecharts address this problem by way of parallel states, hierarchies, and guards to name a few.
    • Parallel states allow modeling independent variables truly independently of each other.
    • Hierarchies (by way of compound states) allow modeling variables that only carry meaning in some circumstances.
    • Guards allow modeling variables that depend on other variables.
Let’s explore how our simple example could benefit from each of these three techniques.
Parallel states
We will start with the simple “valid / invalid” state machine:

Let’s say that the enabled/disabled trait and changed/unchanged trait are completely independent of one another, in other words, that any combination of these variables make sense. If that’s the case, then the independent variables can be modeled using a parallel state:

Each region (demarcated by the dashed lines) are completely independent of each other. Adding more regions does not cause an explosion of states; the statechart grows more or less linearly as more features are added.
Hierarchies
In statecharts, states can be organized hierarchically. When we want to model a new trait, we can attempt to understand how this new trait depends upon the existing states. Perhaps the new trait only makes sense sometimes and not always.
Let’s say that we decide that the valid/invalid trait only makes sense if the field has been modified. In other words, if the field is unchanged we don’t care about the validity of the field. In order to model this, we can move the valid/invalid states as substates of changed:

We still have the same number of fields, and the same number of transitions, but introduced a strict dependency, namely that some states only make sense in the context of another state. By leveraging hierarchies, the state explosion problem goes away too.
Guards
A guard is a sort of pre condition to a transition, in a way it stops a transition from happening if some condition is not true.
To illustrate how guards can help, let’s go back to the parallel version of our statechart, but add the constraint that we can not go from changed to unchanged if we are in the invalid state. In other words, we have to be valid in order to go to unchanged.
We can do this by guarding the transition from changed to unchanged, adding the condition in valid (no pun intended) to the transition:

Again, we have the same number of states, even when states only partially depend on one another.
See also
    • What is a statechart?
    • How to use statecharts
This page is a part of the statecharts.github.io project. Check out the chat rooms over on spectrum.chat where you can find more people discussing statecharts.
Published using GitHub Pages from github.com/statecharts (edit this page)
Glossary: Action Atomic state Compound state Condition state Activity Automatic transition Delayed event Delayed transition Enter Event Exit Final state Generated event Guard History state Initial state Internal event Local transition Parallel State Pseudostate Raised event Refine Self transition State Transition 
What is a statechart?
The primary feature of statecharts is that states can be organized in a hierarchy: A statechart is a state machine where each state in the state machine may define its own subordinate state machines, called substates. Those states can again define substates.
Here’s an example of a state in a state machine, with some extra features:

    • The state is called “D”
    • E and F are substates
    • E even has a substate G
    • “entry” and “exit” actions are mentioned
When the state machine enters this state D it also starts the state machine within it. The initial state of this machine inside D is in fact E so it enters E too. And since E has a single substate G, it is also entered.
A state with no substates is called an atomic state. A state with substates is called a compound state.
Entering a state enters one of its substates
    • When a state is entered, its sub state machine starts and therefore, a substate is entered
    • When a state is exited, its sub state machine is exited too, i.e. any substates also exit
In the example above, when the machine is told to enter D, it actually ends up entering D, E, and G. Conversely, when the state machine exits D it also exits any substates.
Like state machines, statecharts also react to events; events are dealt with by the states and the main side effects are specified by what happens upon entering and exiting states.
A state can have many “regions”
A compound state can be split up into completely separate (“orthogonal”) regions. Each region specifies its own state machine. When a state machine enters such a state, it also enters all of the regions of the state at the same time.

If this state is entered, then it enters both the top and bottom regions, and the following statements will hold true so long as A is active:
    • Exactly one of B and C is active
    • Exactly one of D and E is active
Such a state is called a parallel state, the and regions are often called “orthogonal regions”.
Transitions can be guarded
When an event happens, and the state machine would normally transition from one state to another, statecharts introduce the concepts of guarding the transition. A guard is a condition placed upon the transition, and the transition is essentially ignored if the guard condition is false.
States can have multiple transitions for the same event
The addition of guards allows a state to have more than one transition that reacts to the same event: Two transitions fire on the same event, but only one is picked at run-time depending on which one’s guards evaluate to TRUE.
Transitions can happen automatically
When entering a state, a transition can be defined which is automatically taken. This is useful in conjunction with guards, to move out of a state immediately upon entering it when certain conditions hold, or as soon as those conditions hold.
Transitions can be delayed
Simply being in a state for a duration of time can be enough to transition to a different state. This is accomplished by way of a delayed transition, which defines that the transition should be taken a specific period of time after entering a state.
History
When exiting a compound state and its substate, it is sometimes useful to be able to return to exactly the state that you left. Statecharts introduce the concepts of history states. When a transition goes to a history state, it re-enters the state that “was last active”.
See also
To get a full explanation of the statechart shown above, see the description of the on-off statechart.
This page is a part of the statecharts.github.io project. Check out the chat rooms over on spectrum.chat where you can find more people discussing statecharts.
Published using GitHub Pages from github.com/statecharts (edit this page)
Glossary: Action Atomic state Compound state Condition state Activity Automatic transition Delayed event Delayed transition Enter Event Exit Final state Generated event Guard History state Initial state Internal event Local transition Parallel State Pseudostate Raised event Refine Self transition State Transition 
A simple “On-Off” state machine
Here is a simple state machine that includes a few of the concepts.

From this drawing, we can see that
    • This machine has two states, On and Off
    • it transitions between them whenever it gets the flick event (that’s the two arrows between the states)
    • The “on” state has some actions that happens when it enters or exits that state.
The machine basically functions as an on-off switch which turns a light on or off whenever it gets the “flick” event
Further reading
    • A more advanced on-off switch — adds more features to this simple switch logic
This page is a part of the statecharts.github.io project. Check out the chat rooms over on spectrum.chat where you can find more people discussing statecharts.
Published using GitHub Pages from github.com/statecharts (edit this page)
Glossary: Action Atomic state Compound state Condition state Activity Automatic transition Delayed event Delayed transition Enter Event Exit Final state Generated event Guard History state Initial state Internal event Local transition Parallel State Pseudostate Raised event Refine Self transition State Transition 

A simple on-off statechart
Abstract
This page uses a simple on-off switch, and defines its behaviour using a statechart. The switch is a simple device that has two states: “on” and “off”. When you “flick” the switch, it goes from on to off, or off to on. This is the base behaviour that will be described in a statechart. We will change this behaviour by modifing the statechart. It is a contrived example, but shows some ways to model behaviour using techniques specific to statecharts.
Introduction
Here’s the simple on-off switch, the “simple state machine” that we’ll extend in various ways. In a way it will function as the “zoomed out” view of our statechart too:

We’re going to specialize these two states by adding “substates” to alter the behaviour of the system, but before we continue, let’s recap the behaviour of the state machine above:
    • Whenever the “flick” event happens, the machine will alternate between the on and off states.
    • Whenever it enters/leaves the on state, it invokes an action to turn on or off a light accordingly.
In our refinmenent, this will generally hold true, but with a few exceptions. The exceptions will be described by introducing substates. We’ll start off by introducing a couple of new states within the off state. These substates specialize the behaviour of the off state: It causes it to change behaviour.
The behaviour changes that will be introduced all have to deal with the “misuse” of the light switch, in that spamming the button with the flick event will cause the light to go on and off very, very, quickly, possibly causing the light to break because the light is switched on and off too quickly.
The new behaviour we’re going for is to require a two second period where the “flick event” should not go to the “on” state, and if the flick event happens a bit too early, that the switch now has to wait another two seconds for it to want to go to the “on” state.
Here’s the statechart:

The off state now has it’s own little state machine diagram, complete with
    • Initial state (A)
    • Some states handle the ‘flick’ event, (A)
    • Some states don’t handle the flick event (B)
    • A new event after 2 s indicates a delayed transition.
If the whole statechart is a bit overwhelming, you can try to block out the rest of the statechart, leaving only the OFF state:

Since A is the initial state, then whenever the off state is entered, it also automatically enters the A state. When a state machine is in two states like this at the same time, it is the “deepest” one that gets to handle an event first. So when the machine is in the A state, the “flick” event will be handled by A by transitioning to itself: The A state points back to A. Such an event is consumed by the deepest state.
The delayed transition going from A to B (after 2 seconds) causes the machine enter B if and only if it has been in A, uninterrupted, for 2 seconds.
When the machine is in the B state, and the flick event happens, the B state doesn’t care, and so the parent Off state handles it, by transitioning to the On state.
This is a simple way of defining precise debouncing behaviour. Note how in this state machine, the debouncing only happens for the Off state, and that should the flick event happen in rapid succession, the On state would be exited on the first instance of the event.
Refining the On state
For the On state, we want to do something a bit more special: We want to delay the on action a bit, but allow the flick event to transition us to the Off state at any time. To do this we specialize the on state and move the actions to another substate, so that the entry/exit actions only happen a short time after it’s been in the On state.
Here’s the statechart:

The new states (named C and D here to keep things simple) cause the side effects of entering the On state to be delayed by half a second. However, since none of these substates handle the flick event, then if that event happens at any time in the On state, the state machine immediately goes back to the Off state.
It’s interesting to note that the “turn off” action will only be called if the turn on action was ever called, since it’s only possible to exit D if it ever entered D in the first place.
Refining the On state even further
Let’s say the business side says that they don’t like the behaviour in that if you happened to turn the light on and then off again at just the right moment (0.6 seconds), the light might be on for a tiny fraction of a second (0.1 seconds), and for whatever reason they want the light to never be turned on for less than 0.5 seconds, i.e. that the “turn lights off action should never be called immediately after a turn lights on action, but be powered on for at least 0.5 seconds”
Well that’s simple to accommodate in a Statechart; just specialize the D state by adding a few new substates. These new states would be tasked to handle the flick event for the first 0.5 seconds and essentially “do nothing” if it happens.
Difference between how flick is handled in the On and Off states
The Off and On states have similar behaviour, although not quite the same. Both react to the “flick” event, but slightly differently.
In the Off state, when the button is “flick”ed repeatedly (even for many seconds), the stream of “flick” events will be ignored, and the light will stay Off. It is only when the “flick” event hasn’t happened for 2 seconds, that the next “flick” will turn it on. In other words, the “flick” event must “cool down” for 2 seconds before it has an effect.
In the On state, when the button is “flicked” repeatedly, the flick events in the first 0.5 seconds of the On state are ignored. Only after 0.5 seconds will the “flick” event cause the light turn off. The “flick” event is essentially ignored for half a second.
Light on for (at least) 1/2 second
When in the D state, the flick event should be ignored for 0.5 seconds. This requires a few new states:
    • One for when the Off state should be ignoring the event (let’s call this E)
    • One for when the Off state should be handling the event (let’s call this F)
It should stay in E for 0.5 seconds and then transition to F
In order to ignore the event, we introduce a substate of E, called G which simply is there to ignore the event.
Here’s the new D state, with substates:

Here’s the full statechart:

[Concepts explained] [SCXML version] [XState version]
Conclusion
In all of these examples above, the business logic (the turn light on and turn light off) has been left untouched. All of this new behaviour has been designed in a Statechart. This page has shown a few of the techniques that can be used to solve various problems.
The problem being solved is a bit contrived, and albeit the problem domain is relatively simple (turn a light on or off at the flick of a switch) it does a lot more than a simple boolean:
    • When the light is turned off, any attempts to turn it on again less than 2 seconds after it was turned off will fail. Only when the switch hasn’t been flicked for 2 seconds does the switch start “working” again
    • When a flick of the switch would cause the light to turn on, it doesn’t actually cause the light to turn on until after 0.5 seconds. If the switch is flicked again, the light won’t actually be turned on.
    • When a flick of the swith turns the light on after 0.5 seconds, any additional flicks of the switch are simply ignored for a further 0.5 seconds
Additionally, no weird bugs such as rogue timers cause events to fire out-of-order. In a normal, imperative implementation of this, it is common to forget to cancel any timers that have been started, causing the effects of the timer to be executed even though they were not supposed to. This whole class of bugs no longer exist.
You will never need an on/off switch that functions exactly like this, but if you consider the field of micro-interactions, things can easily get pretty complex. Consider showing a pop-up notification that the user can dismiss by clicking or tapping on it, what if the user was about to tap on something exactly where the pop-up appeared, and instead taps the notification, thus dismissing it without having read the notification. The notification should ignore taps for a short while, perhaps half a second, which is exactly the problem we’ve solved in statecharts.
Finally, the diagram itself is pretty explanatory. One can focus on the top level On and Off states to get a general understanding of what the machine does, and then look into each state in isolation to understand how each one functions.
This page is a part of the statecharts.github.io project. Check out the chat rooms over on spectrum.chat where you can find more people discussing statecharts.
Published using GitHub Pages from github.com/statecharts (edit this page)
Glossary: Action Atomic state Compound state Condition state Activity Automatic transition Delayed event Delayed transition Enter Event Exit Final state Generated event Guard History state Initial state Internal event Local transition Parallel State Pseudostate Raised event Refine Self transition State Transition 

